Lab Report, November 1, 2016
Professor Janyl Jumadinova
Evan Fann, Lucas Hoesch, & Zachary Shaffer
Allegheny College

This work is ours, unless otherwise cited.

1) We used Cascades with Haar for face detection. While this wasn’t the most efficient or effective choice, it was chosen because the easiest to implement. It uses the facedetector program that was used in class so we wouldn’t have to rewrite the detect function. If it detects a face, it detects the room as being occupied even if there is no movement. It also isolates the face when it uploads to dropbox so it uploads both the entire frame and just the face. It has problems with detecting faces at a distance or if someone is in motion, although I would say that part of that is due to the camera. 

2) The experiment went relatively well. We had trouble starting the experiment, but this was mostly due to the slowness of the Raspberry Pi machines themselves. To circumvent these hardware issues, we turned down most of our thresholds, minimum detection values, minimum frames to capture image, and other parameters in the config.json file. It is also worth noting that our Raspberry Pi's case did not fit, nor did it's replacement, and so we had to perform our experiments with an exposed Raspberry Pi. However, this did not hinder our ability to, in the long run, run a successful experiment. We set up our Pi with half of the case on it, set up the camera such that it aimed down the sights of Alden Hall from the table sitting outside of room 101. From this angle, we primarily captured images of the swinging door that is used the most, which allowed us to capture a lot of students and faculty members moving in and out of the building, but did not allow us to capture very many faces, as the camera was at a low angle and mostly caught the sides of people moving by. Over the course of an hour, we captured 79 images (not including the images that were zoomed in and duplicated to specifically record the faces it detected). We noticed that the distribution was unimodal, and centered roughly around the turn of the hour. This makes sense, as classes tend to end towards the ends of the hours. We successfully captured the face of the individuals in the images 6 times, giving us roughly ~7.5% successful face detection for this one experiment. However, this was also only one hour, and so the Pi did not have a lot of time to actually learn and get better at reading faces. The shortcomings of our experiment came mainly from our hardware and the location where we had to place the camera. A better location may have had a better likelihood of capturing more faces, but might not have captured as many students and faculty in the back of the building. Having a full case may have allowed us to temporarily mount the camera to a wall, or possibly even in the Carr Garden, and we could have had completely different results. However, with what we had at our disposal, and with all things considered, I think our experiment was relatively successful.

3) For our Bayesian Network, our goal was to have a network that outlined the probability of finding a person in Alden, and then determining the probability of that person either being a student or a faculty member. The independent conditions of the Bayesian Network (the root nodes) were: Weekday, Business Hours, or Alden is Closed. For Weekday, we used the probability of true being the fraction 5/7, as there are 5 weekdays in a 7-day week. For Business Hours, we chose the probability 15/24, or 15 hours of the 24-hour day. We chose this to fit with the times 8AM (when Alden is opened) through 11PM (when most Lab Monitors' shifts end). The only one of these nodes with an "arbitrary" statistic is whether or not Alden is closed, and that was only because it is just a rare event that Alden is outright closed, and that statistic relies on too many variables (natural disaster, emergency, campus closes suddenly, campus is scheduled to close, Alden is scheduled to close, etc.), but it is also simultaneously important that we acknowledge the possibility that Alden isn't open at all, and so we included the node with a very low (~2.5%) likelihood of being closed, because if Alden is closed then it should be impossible to detect someone in the building. With those values in mind, we calculated the likelihoods of people being in Alden based on those days and hours, and our Bayesian Network and our CPT's are in the same folder as this report for reference. Once those were calculated, we used our data from the experiments to determine the probabilities (we actually counted and identified the people in the images by hand) of the likelihood of the person or persons captured to be a faculty member or a student. We counted a total of 175 people, where 28 of those people were faculty members (mostly Pauline) and the other 147 were students (not all of whom necessarily were Computer Science students), and so that's where we got our data for those tables. The Bayesian Network building program helped us a ton with this section of the lab.

4) We had a plethora of issues with hardware in general. We went through two Raspberry Pi machines as the memory on the Pis were full and we were unable to download all the neccesary steps to make the Pi work with the computer. After failed atempts to make that work, we had the data of the SD card copied over from David Wagner's computer, and then we also went through two cases that neither of which fit. Once we had the copied SD card we were unable to get the camera to work despite it working fine the day before and we had to get a new one. We ended up using the bottom half of the second case when running our experiments, but our Pi was still mostly exposed. We still don't have a case, but we did not need one to finish this lab and meet all of the requirements. 
